CHAPTER XXVIII.
An Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt
not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
Arise, go to Paedon Aram, to the house of Bethuel, thy mother's father, and take thee
a wife from thence, of the daughters of Laban, thy mother's brother.
And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest
of people, and give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee and to thy seed with thee, that thou
mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham.
And Isaac sent away Jacob, and he went to Paedon Aram, unto Laban, son of Bethuel the
Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother.
When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away to Paedon Aram, to take
him a wife from thence, and that as he blessed him, he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt
not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan, and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother,
and was gone to Paedon Aram.
And Esau, seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father, then went Esau
unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had, Maeleth the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's
son, the sister of Nebajeth, to be his wife.
And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran, and he lighted upon a certain
place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set, and he took of the stones
of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep.
And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to
heaven, and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.
And behold the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and
the God of Isaac, the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed, and
thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west,
and to the east, and to the north, and to the south, and in thee and in thy seed shall
all the families of the earth be blessed.
And behold I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will
bring thee again into this land, for I will not leave thee until I have done that which
I have spoken of to thee.
And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord is in this place, and
I knew it not.
And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place!
This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.
And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his pillows,
and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.
And he called the name of that place Bethel, but the name of that city was called Loz at
the first.
And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that
I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to
my father's house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God.
And this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be God's house, and of all that thou
shalt give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee.
Chapter 29
Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the people of the east.
And he looked, and behold a well in the field, and lo, there were three flocks of sheep
lying by it, for out of that well they watered the flocks, and a great stone was upon the
well's mouth.
And thither were all the flocks gathered, and they rolled the stone from the well's
mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well's mouth in his place.
And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, whence be ye?
And they said, Of Heron are we.
And he said unto them, Know ye Laban, the son of Nahor?
And they said, We know him.
And he said unto them, Is he well?
And they said, He is well, and behold, Rachel, his daughter, cometh with the sheep.
And he said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered
together.
Water ye the sheep, and go, and feed them.
And they said, We cannot, until all the flocks be gathered together, until they roll the
stone from the well's mouth, then we water the sheep.
And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father's sheep, for she kept them.
And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of Laban, his mother's brother,
and the sheep of Laban, his mother's brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone
from the well's mouth, and watered the flock of Laban, his mother's brother.
And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that he was Rebekah's son.
And she ran, and told her father.
And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob, his sister's son, that he
ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house.
And he told Laban all these things.
And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh.
And he abode with him the space of a month.
And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve
me for naught, tell me, what shall thy wages be?
And Laban had two daughters.
The name of the elder was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.
Leah was tender-eyed, but Rachel was beautiful and well-favoured.
And Jacob loved Rachel, and said, I will serve thee seven years for Rachel, thy younger daughter.
And Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee, than that I should give her to another
man.
Abide with me.
And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed unto him but a few days for the
love he had to her.
And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in
unto her.
And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.
And it came to pass in the evening that he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to
him, and he went in unto her.
And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for an handmaid.
And it came to pass that in the morning, behold, it was Leah.
And he said to Laban, What is this thou hast done unto me?
Did not I serve with thee for Rachel?
Wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?
And Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give the younger before the
first born.
Fulfill her week, and we will give thee this also, for the service which thou shalt serve
with me yet seven other years.
And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week, and he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife
also.
And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah, his handmaid, to be her maid.
And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served with
him yet seven other years.
And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb, but Rachel was barren.
And Leah conceived, and bear a son, and she called his name Reuben, for she said, Surely
the Lord hath looked upon my affliction, now therefore my husband will love me.
And she conceived again, and bear a son, and said, Because the Lord hath heard that I was
hated, he hath therefore given me this son also.
And she called his name Simeon.
And she conceived again, and bear a son, and said, Now this time will my husband be joined
unto me, because I have borne him three sons.
Therefore was his name called Levi.
And she conceived again, and bear a son, and she said, Now will I praise the Lord.
Therefore she called his name Judah, and left Baring.
CHAPTER XXX
And when Rachel saw that she bear Jacob no children, Rachel envied her sister, and said
unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die.
And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel, and he said, Am I in God's stead, who hath
withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
And she said, Behold my maid Bilha.
Go in unto her, and she shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her.
And she gave him Bilha her handmaid to wife, and Jacob went in unto her.
And Bilha conceived, and bear Jacob a son.
And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a son.
Therefore she called his name Dan.
And Bilha, Rachel's maid, conceived again, and bear Jacob a second son.
And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed.
And she called his name Naphtali.
When Leah saw that she had left Baring, she took Zilpah, her maid, and gave her Jacob
to wife.
And Zilpah Leah's maid, bear Jacob a son.
And Leah said, A troop cometh.
And she called his name Gad.
And Zilpah Leah's maid, bear Jacob a second son.
And Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters will call me blessed.
And she called his name Asher.
And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and brought
them unto his mother Leah.
Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.
And she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband, and wouldest
thou take away my son's mandrakes also?
And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee to-night for thy son's mandrakes.
And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou
must come in unto me, for surely I have hired thee with my son's mandrakes.
And he lay with her that night.
And God harkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bear Jacob the fifth son.
And Leah said, God hath given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband.
And she called his name Issachar.
And Leah conceived again, and bear Jacob the sixth son.
And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry, now will my husband dwell with me,
because I have borne him six sons.
And she called his name Zebulun.
And afterwards she bear a daughter, and called her name Dinah.
And God remembered Rachel, and God harkened to her, and opened her womb.
And she conceived, and bear a son, and said, God hath taken away my reproach.
And she called his name Joseph, and said, The Lord shall add to me another son.
And it came to pass, when Rachel had borne Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban,
Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country.
Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee, and let me go,
for thou knowest my service which I have done thee.
And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in thine eyes,
tarry, for I have learned by experience that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake.
And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.
And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how thy cattle was with me.
For it was little which thou hadst before I came, and it is now increased unto a multitude,
and the Lord hath blessed thee since my coming, and now when shall I provide for mine own house also?
And he said, What shall I give thee?
And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me anything.
If thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again feed and keep thy flock.
I will pass through all thy flock to-day, removing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattle,
and all the brown cattle among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats,
and of such shall be my hire.
So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it shall come for my hire before thy face.
Every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats, and brown among the sheep,
that shall be counted stolen with me.
And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to thy word.
And he removed that day the he-goats that were ring-straked and spotted,
and all the she-goats that were speckled and spotted, and every one that had some white in it,
and all the brown among the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.
And he set three days' journey betwixt himself and Jacob, and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.
And Jacob took him rods of green poplar and of the hazel and chestnut tree,
and piled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods.
And he set the rods which he had piled before the flocks and the gutters and the watering-troughs
when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink.
And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth cattle ring-straked, speckled, and spotted.
And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ring-straked
and all the brown in the flock of Laban, and he put his own flocks by themselves,
and put them not on to Laban's cattle.
And it came to pass, when soever the stronger cattle did conceive,
that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle and the gutters,
that they might conceive among the rods.
But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in, so the feebler were Laban's,
and the stronger Jacob's.
And the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle and maid-servants,
and men-servants, and camels, and asses.
CHAPTER XXXI
And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying,
Jacob hath taken away all that was our father's,
and of that which was our father's hath he gotten all this glory.
And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it was not toward him as before.
And the LORD said unto Jacob,
Return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred, and I will be with thee.
And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock,
and said unto them, I see your father's countenance,
that it is not toward me as before, but the God of my father hath been with me.
And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.
And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times,
but God suffered him not to hurt me.
If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages,
then all the cattle bear speckled.
And if he said thus, The ring-straked shall be thy hire,
then bear all the cattle ring-straked.
Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given them to me.
And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived,
that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream,
and behold, the rams which leaped upon the cattle
were ring-straked, speckled, and grizzled.
And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob, and I said,
Here am I.
And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see all the rams
which leap upon the cattle are ring-straked, speckled, and grizzled,
for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.
I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointed'st the pillar,
and where thou vowed'st to vow unto me.
Now arise, get thee out from this land,
and return unto the land of thy kindred.
And Rachel and Lee answered, and said unto him,
Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?
Are we not counted of him strangers?
For he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured also our money.
For all the riches which God hath taken from our father,
that is ours, and our children's.
Now then, whatsoever God had said unto thee, Do.
Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels,
and he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he had gotten,
the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in pagan Aram,
for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.
And Laban went to shear his sheep, and Rachel had stolen the images
that were her father's.
And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian,
in that he told him not that he fled.
So he fled with all that he had, and he rose up,
and passed over the river, and set his face toward the Mount Gilead.
And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.
And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days' journey,
and they overtook him in the Mount Gilead.
And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him,
Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob, either good or bad.
Then Laban overtook Jacob.
Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mount,
and Laban with his brethren pitched in the Mount of Gilead.
And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away
unawares to me, and carried away my daughters,
as captives taken with the sword?
Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from me,
and didst not tell me that I might have sent thee away with mirth,
and with songs, with tabret, and with harp,
and hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters?
Thou hast now done foolishly in so doing.
It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt.
But the God of your father spake unto me yesternight, saying,
Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob, either good or bad.
And now, though thou wouldst needs be gone, because thou soar longest
after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?
And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid, for I said,
Peradventure thou wouldst take by force thy daughters from me.
With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live,
before our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee.
For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen them.
And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and
into the two maidservants' tents, but he found them not.
Then went he out of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent.
Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's furniture,
and sat upon them.
And Laban searched all the tent, but found them not.
And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I cannot
rise up before thee, for the custom of women is upon me.
And he searched, but found not the images.
And Jacob was wroth, and showed with Laban.
And Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is my trespass?
What is my sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me?
Whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all thy
household stuff, said it here before my brethren and thy brethren,
that they may judge betwixt us both.
This twenty years have I been with thee, thy yews and thy she-goats
have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten.
That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee, I bear the loss
of it, of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by day or stolen
by night.
Thus I was, in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night,
and my sleep departed from mine eyes.
Thus have I been twenty years in thy house, I served thee fourteen
years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle, and thou hast
changed my wages ten times.
Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac
had been with me, surely thou had sent me away now empty.
God had seen mine affliction and the labor of my hands, and rebuked
thee yester-night.
And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters are my daughters,
and these children are my children, and these cattle are my cattle, and
all that thou seest is mine, and what can I do this day unto these my
daughters, or unto their children which they have borne?
Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou, and let
it be for a witness between me and thee.
And Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.
And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones, and they took stones,
and made a heap, and they did eat there upon the heap.
And Laban called it G-gar-say-a-dutha, but Jacob called it Gaelid.
And Laban said, This heap is a witness between me and thee this day.
Therefore was the name of it called Gaelid, and Mizpah, for he said,
The Lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another.
If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other wives
beside my daughters, no man is with us.
See, God is witness betwixt me and thee.
And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold this pillar which
I have cast betwixt me and thee.
This heap be witness, and this pillar be witness, that I will not pass
over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and
this pillar unto me for harm.
The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father,
judge betwixt us.
And Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac.
Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren
to eat bread.
And they did eat bread, and tarried all night in the mount.
And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his
daughters, and blessed them.
And Laban departed, and returned unto his place.
End of Genesis chapters 28 through 31.
Recording by Darren L. Slider, Fort Worth, Texas,
www.logoslibrary.org.